# Difference_Arrays_ArrayLists
 Contains source code for Discussion #3

In Java, arrays are used to store a list of values that are of the same type.  When initializing arrays, the size of the list must be determined at initialization.  For example, to create an array of five integers, you would type the following:   'int[] values = new int[5];".  When accessing elements of the array, the correct syntax to use is values[index] where the index begins at 0.  This would be used for either reading from or writing to the array.  Using these is useful when the size of your list is already known prior to running the program.  However in many applications, we do not know the size of our list and flexibility on the size is desired during runtime.  To achieve this, ArrayLists can be used instead.  ArrayList is a java class which allows for the creation of lists of variables which are of the same type, but does not require initialization of the list size.  For example, to create an ArrayList of Strings, you would type the following:  "ArrayList<String> names = new ArrayList<String>();".  This creates a list of size zero, but using the add method included in the ArrayList class, you can add elements to the list during runtime.  Furthermore, there are other methods such as remove, set, get, etc. which allow access and modification to the existing elements in the ArrayList.  

One difference to note between arrays and ArrayLists is that the latter cannot make lists of primitive data types such as int, double, etc.  In order to create an ArrayList of these types, wrapper classes are required.  An example initializing statement would be "ArrayList<Integer> values = new ArrayList<Integer>()".  Similar initializations could be made for the Character, Boolean, Double, etc. wrapper classes.  Besides this, arrays and ArrayLists can be used mostly in the same ways.  But if the size of the array is expected to vary throughout runtime, the ArrayList is the proper choice.
